Write an article on Reactive Controllers and Redux (#1283)
lit/lit.dev: packages/lit-dev-content/site/articles/article/redux-reactive-controllers.md

Reactive Controllers are just an interface – a pattern, which makes them easier to use with other component systems without committing to a specific architecture. This makes it possible to create Reactive Controller adapters that work with other frameworks and libraries, such as [React](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@lit/react#usecontroller), Vue, Angular, and Svelte.

## What is Redux?

[Redux](https://redux.js.org/) is a mature library that introduces patterns to manage state across a JavaScript application. The Lit team does not have a particular endorsement for a single state management library, but we will be using Redux as an example for creating a Reactive Controller, because the patterns used in integrating Redux into Lit with a Reactive Controller may be used to integrate for other popular libraries.

There are three general concepts that Redux describes:

1. Stores
2. Actions
3. Reducers

> Stores contain the current application state. Actions describe what kind of change to make to the state, and reducers take actions and apply them to the current state to return a new state. Here is a diagram derived from the [official Redux documentation](redux.js.org/tutorials/essentials/part-1-overview-concepts#redux-application-data-flow ?) that depicts the interaction pattern between these concepts:

Reviewer: This markdown link doesn't work, and seems to render in full.

See preview url: https://pr1283-b46091e---lit-dev-5ftespv5na-uc.a.run.app/articles/redux-reactive-controllers/#:~:text=%5Bofficial%20Redux%20documentation

<img
    src="/images/articles/redux-reactive-controllers/application-sans-labels.webp"
    loading="lazy"
    width="550px"
    title="Sketch of the redux application"
    alt="A vector box diagram of the entire redux application. There are 3 sections. The first is the shape-dials component – it has 3 rows. The first row is a minus button, the label 'squares', followed by a plus button. The second row is a minus button, the label 'circles', followed by a plus button. The final row is a long 'reset' button. The next section to the right of the shape-dials section the '<shape-count>' component. It is a black box with 3 rows of text. The first row is '2 circles'. The second row is '2 squares', and the third row is '4 total'. Below the shape-dials and shape-count components is a long rectangle which is the '<shape-list>' section. This is a long, horizonal, black rectangle and inside of it is a red square followed by a blue circle, blue circle, and another red square.">

### Initial State

We need to define an initial state, so in a <code>store.<ts-js></ts-js></code> file we will give the initial state the following shape:

```ts
export type Shape = 'square' | 'circle';

> export type State = Record<`${Shape}s`, number> & {shapeList: Shape[]};

Reviewer 2: I fully take blame for introducing this and agree it should be simplified or removed.

```ts
import type { Store, Action as RAction } from '@reduxjs/toolkit';
...

export type Selector<State, Result> = (state: State) => Result;

export class SelectorController<
    State,
    Action extends RAction,
    Result = unknown
> implements ReactiveController {
  private _host: ReactiveControllerHost;
  private _store: Store<State, Action>;
  private _selector: Selector<State, Result>;

  constructor(
    host: ReactiveControllerHost,
    store: Store<State, Action>,
    selector: Selector<State, Result>,
  ) {
    this._host = host;
    host.addController(this);

    this._store = store;
    this._selector = selector;
  }
}
```

Now let’s initialize the initially selected value so that the user can access the state’s initial value with `selectorController.value` using the user's selector:

```ts
...
export class SelectorController<
    State,
    Action extends RAction,
    Result = unknown
> implements ReactiveController {
  ...
  value: Result;

  constructor(
    host: ReactiveControllerHost,
    store: Store<State, Action>,
    selector: Selector<State, Result>,
  ) {
    ...

>     this.value = selector(store.getState());

Reviewer: These incremental additions are a bit hard to follow without a playground open to provide a full picture. No action required here except I think this would be solved with a playground.

Redux stores have a [`Store.subscribe(listener)`](https://redux.js.org/api/store#subscribelistener) method which will call a given callback whenever the state of the store updates. Let's hook into this, update `this.value`, and tell the host to update when the component is connected to the DOM:

```ts
...
export class SelectorController<
    State,
    Action extends RAction,
    Result = unknown
> implements ReactiveController {
  ...

  hostConnected() {
    this.store.subscribe(() => {
      const selected = this._selector(this._store.getState());
      if (selected !== this.value) {
        this.value = selected;
        this._host.requestUpdate();
      }
    });
  }
}
```

Great! Now the controller will update its value and tell the host element to update whenever the state changes. Additionally, by first comparing the previous state to the current state, we can avoid re-rendering components that don't need to be re-rendered which can improve performance. Nice!

> In conclusion, we need to improve our component so that it does not re-render when the component is disconnected from the page and the store’s state changes. Redux’s `Store.subscribe()` method returns an `unsubscribe()` function. Let’s keep track of this and unsubscribe from the store’s changes when the component disconnects.

Reviewer: Nit: Starting with `In conclusion,` makes me feel like we're about to wrap up the article.

```ts
...
export class SelectorController<
    State,
    Action extends RAction,
    Result = unknown
> implements ReactiveController {
  ...
  private _unsubscribe: () => void;
  ...

  hostConnected() {
    this._unsubscribe = this._store.subscribe(() => {
      ...
    });
  }

  hostDisconnected() {
    this._unsubscribe();
  }
}
```

> We now have a Redux `SelectorController` Reactive Controller that listens to a Redux store for state changes, selects a value from the state, and updates the host element whenever that state value changes!

Reviewer: Nice section! Imho this section is the juicy part of the article that shows off the actual integration. We can maybe celebrate this more.
Could use this location to hammer home the benefits of having a `SelectorController`.

"The SelectorController can be reused across components that need to access some state in the redux store, and all the logic for automatically and efficiently re-rendering those components is encapsulated in this controller."

    loading="lazy"
    width="550px"
    title="Sketch of the redux application"
    alt="A vector box diagram of the entire redux application. There are 3 sections. The first is the shape-dials component – it has 3 rows. The first row is a minus button, the label 'squares', followed by a plus button. The second row is a minus button, the label 'circles', followed by a plus button. The final row is a long 'reset' button. This component is surrounded by a red dashed-square labeled '<shape-dials>'. The next section to the right of the shape-dials section is labeled by a red label that says '<shape-count>'. It is a black box with 3 rows of text. The first row is '2 circles'. The second row is '2 squares', and the third row is '4 total'. Below the shape-dials and shape-count components is a long rectangle labeled '<shape-list>'. This is a long, horizonal, black rectangle and inside of it is a red square followed by a blue circle, blue circle, and another red square.">

### shape-count

`shape-count` should be a component that only subscribes and reads from the store. Let us create a custom element and render the table:

```ts
import { LitElement, html} from 'lit';

> import { customElement} from 'lit/decorators.js';

Reviewer: Nit: The spaces are imbalanced between the `{` and `}`.

@customElement('shape-count')
export class ShapeCount extends LitElement {
  render() {
    return html`
      <table>
        <tr>
          <td>${0}</td>
          <td>circles</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>${0}</td>
          <td>squares</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>${0}</td>
          <td>total</td>
        </tr>
      </table>
    `;
  }
}
```

> Next we want to render actual counts rather than just `0`. In this case we will need all values from the state:

Reviewer: Nit: `In this case we will need all values from the state:`.
Maybe:

`In this case we will need to pull those values from the store`.

- `state.circles`
- `state.squares`
- `state.shapeList`

> To achieve this, we will need a broad Redux selector that selects the entire state:

Reviewer: Maybe, "that selects the entire store"?

```ts
...
import { SelectorController } from './selector-controller.js';
import { store } from './store.js';

@customElement('shape-count')
export class ShapeCount extends LitElement {
  private sc = new SelectorController(this, store, (state) => state);

  render() {
    const {circles, squares, shapeList} = this.sc.value;

    return html`
      <table>
        <tr>
          <td>${circles}</td>
          <td>circles</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>${squares}</td>
          <td>squares</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>${shapeList.length}</td>
          <td>total</td>
        </tr>
      </table>
    `;
  }
}
```

The counts are now pulled from the state in Redux and any updates to the state will update the component!

To accomplish this, we initialized the `SelectorController` with the shared Redux store and rendered the entire state.

### shape-list

> `shape-list` should be a component that only subscribes and reads the `state.shapeList` state from the store. Let's create a custom element with boilerplate, and render an array of `<div>` elements with classes set to the shape name. Our pre-provided CSS styles will render the squares and circles based on the class name.

Reviewer: Nit: can `pre-provided` be removed?

```ts
import { customElement } from 'lit/decorators.js';
import { LitElement, html} from 'lit';

@customElement('shape-list')
export class ShapeList extends LitElement {
  render() {
    const shapeList = [];

    return shapeList.map(
        shape => html`<div class="${shape}"></div>`
    );
  }
}
```

> Next, let’s initialize our `SelectorController` to hook into Redux and render the `shapeList`:

Reviewer: Worth calling out that this time the selector is focussing a specific value (`shapeList`), instead of selecting the whole store with an identity function?

The difference here is that this component will only re-render if specifically `shapeList` changes.

```ts
...
import { SelectorController } from './selector-controller.js';
import { store } from './store.js';

@customElement('shape-list')
export class ShapeList extends LitElement {
  private sc = new SelectorController(this, store, (state) => state.shapeList);

  render() {
    const shapeList = this.sc.value;

>     ...

Reviewer: I'm not sure it's worth omitting the returned line here, since it shows that it is fine to re-render lists and it's efficient.

  }
}
```

> The `shape-list` component should now be responsive to changes in the Redux store!

Reviewer: `responsive` makes me think window size. Dare I say, I think I prefer the word "reactive" instead. (But this is a nit, not required).

Another small nit: Can the word "should now be" be replaced with "is now"? I read "should" as "probably", and sure hope the shape-list is reactive to the redux store now!

> We were able to accomplish this by initializing the `SelectorController` with the shared Redux store. We then selected only the `shapeList` from the state and updated the host element only when the arrays were truly not equal.

Reviewer: Nit: Did this opt-into past tense?

### Preventing invalid inputs in shape-dials

To prevent invalid inputs, we will use our `SelectorController` to disable the buttons in the `shape-dials` component. For example, we want to disable the decrement buttons when the respective shape count is 0, and we want to disable the reset button when the length of the `shapeList` is 0.

> We will be using the entire state object again, so the selector will be broad. Let’s add the SelectorController to our `shape-dials` component.

Reviewer: Nit: Can maybe remove "so the selector will be broad".

For example, the [@lit/task](/docs/data/task/) library can perform simple async logic and easily render results and status. Reactive Controllers can fit nicely in other similar projects such as [Axios](https://axios-http.com/), [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query/latest), or the experimental [@lit-labs/router](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@lit-labs/router).

### Your Own Bespoke Behavior

Reactive Controllers are generally a good way to share logic across components and we cannot cover every possible use case here. For example [Material Design’s Material Components](https://material-web.dev) have written their own bespoke controllers such as the [SurfacePositionController](https://github.com/material-components/material-web/blob/v1.1.1/menu/internal/controllers/surfacePositionController.ts) which can position a popup surface next to an anchor or [TypeaheadController](https://github.com/material-components/material-web/blob/v1.1.1/menu/internal/controllers/typeaheadController.ts) which can automatically select an item from a list just by typing the first few letters of the item like an autocomplete.

> Reactive Controllers are flexible, focused, and a great way to integrate libraries into your Lit project or any framework of your choice.

Reviewer: This whole ending section is awesome. It's a great upbeat section full of awesome examples and ideas.

Could also add a call to action to inspire readers to go and implement some controllers where they see the requirement to share behavior.

[Reactive Controllers](/docs/composition/controllers/) can help with the problem of sharing logic across components without having to create a new web component. They are similar to custom hooks in React, and in this article, we will use them to integrate the state manager Redux with Lit's rendering lifecycle for a more self-contained, composable, idiomatic Lit experience.

By the end of this article, you will learn how to use Reactive Controllers to integrate third party libraries into Lit by integrating Redux into Lit. To do this, we will create a Reactive Controller that selects part of a Redux state and updates a component whenever the state updates.

## What is a Reactive Controller?

Reactive Controllers are a programming pattern that makes it easy to share logic between components by hooking into a component’s reactive update lifecycle. They achieve this by expecting an object that exposes an interface rather than having to create a new component or subclassing like you would with a mixin.

> One advantage of the Reactive Controller pattern is that it creates a **with** relationship rather than an **is** relationship. For example, a component that uses a Reactive Controller that incorporates Redux logic is a **component with Redux selector abilities**, whereas a mixin that does the same would mean that the **component is a Redux selector component**. This type of composability results in code that is more portable, self-contained, and easier to refactor. This is because components that inherit via subclassing are more closely coupled with the logic they inherit.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth mentioning for readers familiar with React that Reactive Controllers are like hooks whereas mixins are like higher order components? It also allows parallels below how the `SelectorController` is much like the `useSelector` hook from `react-redux`.

### ReactiveControllerHost

Reactive Controllers typically have access to an instance of an object that implements the `ReactiveControllerHost` interface, which is often passed to them upon initialization. This allows the Reactive Controller to attach itself to the host and request that it update and re-render.

The `ReactiveControllerHost` interface exposes three methods and one property:

- [`addController(controller: ReactiveController)`](/docs/api/ReactiveElement/#ReactiveElement.addController)
- [`removeController(controller: ReactiveController)`](/docs/api/ReactiveElement/#ReactiveElement.removeController)
- [`requestUpdate()`](/docs/api/ReactiveElement/#ReactiveElement.requestUpdate)
- [`updateComplete: Promise<boolean>`](/docs/api/ReactiveElement/#ReactiveElement.updateComplete)

The `addController()` method takes in the controller that you want to hook into the host’s lifecycle.

{% aside "info" "no-header" %}

If the host is already attached to the DOM or rendered onto the page, then `hostConnected()` will be called after attaching the Reactive Controller via `addController()`.

> {% endaside %}

Reviewer 2: This is specific to `@lit/reactive-element`'s implementation of `addController()`. Perhaps it could be rephrased as a recommended way to implement `addController()` or removed?

A common pattern in Lit is to attach the current instance of the controller to the host in the `constructor()` of the ReactiveController. For example:

```ts
export class MyController implements ReactiveController {
  private host: ReactiveControllerHost;

  constructor(host: ReactiveControllerHost, options: MyOptions) {
    this.host = host;
    this.host.addController(this);
  }
}
```

> The `removeController()` method is used less frequently than the other callbacks. It is useful when you do not want the controller to update with the host, such as: the host updates too often, the `hostUpdate[d]()` methods have slow or expensive logic, or you do not need the controller to run its updates while the component has been removed from the document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `removeController()` method is used less frequently than the other callbacks. It is useful when you do not want the controller to update with the host, such as: the host updates too often, the `hostUpdated()` methods have slow or expensive logic, or you do not need the controller to run its updates while the component has been removed from the document.
```

The `requestUpdate()` method is used to request the host component to re-run its update lifecycle and re-render. This is often called when the controller has a value that updates and should be reflected in the DOM. For example, the `@lit/task` package’s `Task` controller will do asynchronous work like fetching data or asynchronous rendering, and it calls the host’s `requestUpdate()` method to reflect that the state of the task has changed to pending, in progress, completed, or error which should be rendered in the component.

The read-only `updateComplete` property is often used in conjunction with `requestUpdate()` method. A `ReactiveControllerHost`’s update lifecycle is assumed to be asynchronous, so the `updateComplete` property is a promise that resolves when the host’s update lifecycle has completed. This is useful for controllers that need to update the DOM and then read from it. For example, imagine a controller that resizes a DOM element and needs to then read its new dimensions. This controller would update a property, call `requestUpdate()`, await `host.updateComplete`, and then read the DOM.

## Redux Patterns

> Redux has a bit of verbosity associated with it in order to enforce the Redux state management patterns. In this article we will be making a simple component that renders circles and squares, renders how many of them exist, and can increment or decrement the amount of circles and squares. This component will have its state managed by Redux.

Reviewer 2: Commenting on this whole section: The pattern shown here is an older redux pattern that is more verbose than needed. I think the goal of this article shouldn't be to teach Redux so we just use the most concise way to create actions and reducers, which is `createSlice` from `@redux/toolkit`.
https://redux.js.org/tutorials/essentials/part-2-app-structure#the-counter-example-app

Reviewer 2: Found the old playground example this article is based from. Here's a stab and refactoring to use `createSlice`. Auto generated action creators remove the need for the verbose enumerated action types. https://lit.dev/playground/#gist=4c07268fb5ec5fddf0280e7882d39bc0

<img
    src="/images/articles/redux-reactive-controllers/application-sans-labels.webp"
    loading="lazy"
    width="550px"
    title="Sketch of the redux application"
    alt="A vector box diagram of the entire redux application. There are 3 sections. The first is the shape-dials component – it has 3 rows. The first row is a minus button, the label 'squares', followed by a plus button. The second row is a minus button, the label 'circles', followed by a plus button. The final row is a long 'reset' button. The next section to the right of the shape-dials section the '<shape-count>' component. It is a black box with 3 rows of text. The first row is '2 circles'. The second row is '2 squares', and the third row is '4 total'. Below the shape-dials and shape-count components is a long rectangle which is the '<shape-list>' section. This is a long, horizonal, black rectangle and inside of it is a red square followed by a blue circle, blue circle, and another red square.">

### Initial State

> We need to define an initial state, so in a <code>store.<ts-js></ts-js></code> file we will give the initial state the following shape:

Reviewer 2: The code sample below isn't switchable so I don't see a reason to switch on the file extension either. Since these are not docs, I think it's fine to stick to TS all the way, unless you really want to show the JS code sample too.

Next we need to give some elements the ability to connect and subscribe to changes to the store and update the UI. On top of that we will write a “Selector” which will select a specific datum from the overall state, and if that value changes, we will tell the Reactive Controller host to re-render.

### Attaching the Controller and Accepting options

First we will write the definition of the `SelectorController` class and attach it to the host element so that the Reactive Controller can hook into the host’s reactive update lifecycle:

```ts
import type { ReactiveController, ReactiveControllerHost } from 'lit';

export class SelectorController implements ReactiveController {
  host: ReactiveControllerHost;

  constructor(host: ReactiveControllerHost) {
    this.host = host;
    host.addController(this);
  }
}
```

> Next, let's accept the following options: the Redux store in which we would like to subscribe to, as well as the Selector we would like to use to select what data we would like to render from the store:

Reviewer 2: Data can be selected for other reasons than rendering
```suggestion
Next, let's accept the following options: the Redux store in which we would like to subscribe to, as well as the Selector we would like to use to select what data we would like to pick out from the store:
```

```ts
import type { Store, Action as RAction } from '@reduxjs/toolkit';
...

export type Selector<State, Result> = (state: State) => Result;

export class SelectorController<
    State,
    Action extends RAction,
    Result = unknown
> implements ReactiveController {
  host: ReactiveControllerHost;
  store: Store<State, Action>;

>   selector: Selector<State, Result>;

Reviewer 2: Nit: It probably makes sense to mark all of these as private and do either `#` or `_` prefix.

  constructor(
    host: ReactiveControllerHost,
    store: Store<State, Action>,
    selector: Selector<State, Result>,
  ) {
    this.host = host;
    host.addController(this);

    this.store = store;
    this.selector = selector;
  }
}
```

Now let’s initialize the initially selected value so that the user can access the state’s initial value with `selectorController.selected` using the user's selector:

```ts
...
export class SelectorController<
    State,
    Action extends RAction,
    Result = unknown
> implements ReactiveController {
  ...

>   selected: Result;

Reviewer 2: Nit: I think `value` makes more sense for this field which also should be marked public.

```ts
...
export type EqualityCheck = (a: unknown, b: unknown) => boolean;
const tripleEquals: EqualityCheck = (a, b) => a === b;

export class SelectorController<
    State,
    Action extends RAction,
    Result = unknown
> implements ReactiveController {
  ...
  equalityCheck : EqualityCheck;

  constructor(
    host: ReactiveControllerHost,
    store: Store<State, Action>,
    selector: Selector<State, Result>,
    equalityCheck = tripleEquals
  ) {
    ...
    this.equalityCheck = equalityCheck;
  }

  hostConnected() {
    this.store.subscribe(() => {
      const selected = this.selector(this.store.getState());
      if (!this.equalityCheck(this.selected, selected)) {
        this.selected = selected;
        this.host.requestUpdate();
      }
    });
  }
}
```

By first comparing the previous state to the current state, we can avoid re-rendering components that don't need to be re-rendered which can improve performance. Nice!

> In conclusion, we need to improve our component so that it does not re-render when the component is disconnected from the page and the store’s state changes. Redux’s `Store.subscribe()` method returns an `unsubscribe()` function. Let’s keep track of this and unsubscribe from the store’s changes when the component disconnects.

Reviewer 2: Logically it feels like unsubscribe should be implemented before the equality check as a subscribe/unsubscribe and connected/disconnected generally should be considered together. Equality check is an optimization that can be done afterwards.

Reviewer 2: Also I'm debating whether configurable equality check is even needed. With redux recommending immutable patterns, triple equal should be good enough and it removes some complexity from the basic demonstration here.

Author: `===` would cause the array to re-render every state change in the shapes-list. a shallow equals would be useful here. Actually they offer a [shallowEqual](https://github.com/reduxjs/react-redux/blob/master/src/utils/shallowEqual.ts) in their react redux library

Reviewer 2: For redux state, the array should only be a new reference if any items inside it has changed so `===` works. The `shallowEqual` in `react-redux` is used for comparing state/props across React component re-renders which would always be a new object.

I don't disagree that if we were to actually vend this as a package, we should make the equality check configurable. I wanted to raise whether it's worth the complication in a reactive controller demonstration.

Ultimately, I think it's fine to keep as an example of what things could be options for a controller. I do still think the order should be flipped with the disconnected.

Author: removed

      <table>
        <tr>
          <td>${0}</td>
          <td>circles</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>${0}</td>
          <td>squares</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>${0}</td>
          <td>total</td>
        </tr>
      </table>
    `;
  }
}
```

Next we want to render actual counts rather than just `0`. In this case we will need all values from the state:

- `state.circles`
- `state.squares`
- `state.shapeList`

To achieve this, we will need a broad Redux selector that selects the entire state:

```ts
...
import { SelectorController } from './selector-controller.js';
import { store } from './store.js';

@customElement('shape-count')
export class ShapeCount extends LitElement {
  private sc = new SelectorController(this, store, (state) => state);

  render() {
    const {circles, squares, shapeList} = this.sc.selected;

    return html`
      <table>
        <tr>
          <td>${circles}</td>
          <td>circles</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>${squares}</td>
          <td>squares</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>${shapeList.length}</td>
          <td>total</td>
        </tr>
      </table>
    `;
  }
}
```

> Pressing the buttons in `shape-dials` should now update the count!

Reviewer 2: It's a bit hard to follow this part since we haven't actually seen `shape-dials`.. maybe that's okay for now.

Author: Does the image in the previous section nor the image in the Actions section not help?

Reviewer 2: I think my uneasiness with this sentence is more that this describes what clicking the buttons in `shape-dials` does which isn't the what the previous code is about. It's about subscribing to the store and updating UI on state change.

Maybe it can be something like
```suggestion
The counts are now pulled from the state in Redux and any updates to the state will update the component!
```

Author: ah this makes sense

To accomplish this, we initialized the `SelectorController` with the shared Redux store and rendered the entire state.

### shape-list

> `shape-list` should be a component that only subscribes and reads the `state.shapeList` state from the store. Let's create a custom element with boilerplate, and render an array of `<div>`s with classes set to the shape name. Our pre-provided CSS styles will render the squares and circles based on the class name.

Reviewer 2: Nit: adding "s" after code text just looks really bad with our style, especially after a closing `>`.
```suggestion
`shape-list` should be a component that only subscribes and reads the `state.shapeList` state from the store. Let's create a custom element with boilerplate, and render an array of `<div>` elements with classes set to the shape name. Our pre-provided CSS styles will render the squares and circles based on the class name.
```
